Part 1 - you are excused

One of the more difficult things about being an artist is when family and friends have occasion to look at your pictures and the Oh-isn't-that-nice! fest begins. Probably the most important message I have for the average adult human being is: 

It's OK if you don't enjoy looking at art. 

I'll gladly make a deal with anybody: you excuse me from having to be informed about the intricacies of tax shelters or hockey strategies and I'll excuse you from having to look at and make appreciative noises about my pictures. 

The word "art" covers everything from paper towel patterns to Picasso. One of the most serious failings of the modern educational system is the insidious insecurity it fosters that art is something everyone ought to appreciate, because after all, art is about beauty and beauty is good stuff. 

When I was a boy, art was for sissies, all my friends knew it, and anyone who painted pictures had the good sense to do so in the privacy of his own home. In large measure this street-smarts has been an effective antidote to the education system's poison, and I wouldn't normally have much trouble with male guests feeling obligated to look at and make comments about my pictures. Typically the problems only start when women are present and their male spouses get that look that tells them they are obliged to sit down to look at the pretty pictures along with the women folk. 

So, for all you non-sissy males in the world here is my gift to you

One free pass
excusing the bearer from participating 
in an art-related activity of his choice

Print several copies on business card stock and keep them in your wallet.

That's all very well for the male of the species. But what about the female? Well, that's where women's lib comes in. Ladies: you've claimed the right to work 9 to 5 in a cubicle. You've claimed the right to wear faded blue jeans, with or without rips and tatters. You've claimed the right to use construction worker vocabulary. Now is the time to go that extra mile and claim the right to admit your lack of interest in "serious" art, if that's the way you feel. Of course it is. Admit it! Rejoice in this new-found freedom from guilt!

If you're honest with yourself and have the courage to face the world free from the insidious poison of art-guilt, print multiple copies of the following on card stock and keep them handy:

One free pass
excusing the bearer from participating 
in an art-related activity of her choice


Part 2

Part 2 and the rest of this series is targeted at the non-artist and will serve as a quick overview of the visual art microcosm - a sort of Art Appreciation 101 course in a nutshell. If you took such a course in school, think of it as a refresher. Art appreciation is like learning to ride a bicycle. Once you get to the right age, a few minutes of instruction, a steadying hand, plus a small push will get you going, then the rest comes from riding around.

Recently I spent half an hour wandering the aisles of a local indoor flea market - the modern equivalent of the outdoor bazaar with a tent or stall for each merchant. The number of stalls devoted to pictures has decreased since my last visit a few years ago but the fact that there are any at all is itself worthy of note. In fact, many of the wares I saw serve no other function than decoration - although admittedly more often decoration of the body, as in jewelry or a printed t-shirt.

We know that decoration has been scratched or painted on manufactured objects and cave walls for all the 50,000 years that homo sapiens has graced the planet. We now know that one of the primary mutations that created the homo sapiens species results in our hugely over-grown visual cortex. Apparently, we have so much excess visual processing capacity that where visual complexity is missing we feel compelled to supply it.

What we now call art surely grew out of this decoration compulsion. Functionally, the walls of our homes might as well be bare but for our need for continual and massive doses of visual input. Nevertheless, decoration is not necessarily about beautification. This is a distinction that an artist may have a great deal of trouble grasping. A large subset of the male population, for example, is far more interested in tokens of power than in beauty. A tattoo or body painting <b>can</b> be colorful zig-zags or curliques; it can also be a flaming sword or a gang emblem.

Power is about using - exploiting - the world. Martin Buber wrote a whole <a href-"http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_and_Thou">book</a> exploring the dichotomy between using and participating in the world. Evolution gifted us with an incredible visual sub-system, but the shaping force of that evolution was survival and dominance, not poetry and grace. 

The next time you're at a gallery, an art museum, or an art show of any sort take a few minutes to observe your fellow observers. Notice how many have arms folded across their chests or otherwise present a judgmental posture. In part, the very mechanics of flat art enforce this. Pictures are hung on walls, forcing us to stand or sit at a physical distance in order to "take them in". 

Also notice how many have creased brows, looks of serious concentration, or even frowns. What we still call modern art too often seems no longer about enriching the visual environment with images of beauty or tokens of power conferred upon the viewer, but rather are dominance games that attempt to confer power to the artist. The underlying statement is nearly always: "I am clever and deep. Are you up to the challenge?" 

Yet even if the art being shown is purely representational (or at least harmlessly impressionistic), you're still likely to observe the judgmental stance and concentrated expressions in your fellow observers. A Rembrandt may sell for millions of dollars, sending a message to the public that reinforces the same message they got in school. "Serious" art is done by "geniuses" and is therefore imbued with subtleties that the average person may never be able to discern. Your fellow art show attendee is very likely involved in a desperate effort to experience a bit of this magic.  


Part 3

In part 1 I ended with:

notebox "Serious" art is done by "geniuses" and is therefore imbued with subtleties that the average person may never be able to discern. Your fellow art show attendee is very likely involved in a desperate effort to experience a bit of this magic.

This is really no different than the vastly different experiences various viewers at a professional baseball game will have. Someone who has played amateur baseball as a serious pastime for several years will have a very keen appreciation of the nuances of play and the tour-de-force skill levels he or she is witnessing. In contrast his or her spouse might see nothing but the most superficial fact that the ball was hit or missed by someone with a bat, caught or not caught by someone with a mitt, etc.

The typical non-artist looks <b>through</b> a representational painting or photograph and latches on to its subject matter, as though the picture were a window upon the real world. The viewer assumes the artist is saying: "this is what your eyes would have shown you if you had been standing were I was at a particular moment in time". Any beauty or value presumably comes from the real world and the artist serves as reporter or documenter thereof.

We can say: 

Spring is a pleasant time of year when flowers bloom, birds sing, and people engage in outdoor activities.

Or we can say:

Spring, the sweet Spring, is the year's pleasant king;
Then blossoms each thing, then maids dance in a ring,
Cold doth not sting, the pretty birds do sing—
    Cuckoo, jug-jug, pu-we, to-witta-woo!

- as did <a href="http://www.englishverse.ccom/poems/spring">Thomas Nash</a>, a few years back.

Similarly, there can be many ways of depicting a young woman sitting on a chair. One may be your daughter's annual school photo, another is Da Vinci's Mona Lisa. It's not just what you say (or show) but <b>how</b> you say (or show) it. 

Consider this snapshot of a park pond in New York:

TwLkNov2pmCropsz500x392.jpg

Now consider this watercolour made at the same spot by Linda Shedlock:

IMG_0940sz500x348.jpg

The photograph is prose; the painting, poetry. Lacking a title, you may well have assumed Twin Lakes November is pure abstract art.  When I was growing up, most people, including many artists, found the new abstract style of art to be threatening. The question was: what was the artist saying? And the answer seemed to be written in a foreign tongue. Now, fifty years later many people have abstract paintings hanging in their homes. We have come to realize that an abstract painting is a song without words: the message, like music, is aimed at the heart, not the head.  

With such an example of grace and lyricality as Twin Lakes November, we might conclude that representationalism in general, and photography in particular, are doomed to prosaic artlessness. In Part 3 we'll explore that premise a bit further.


Part 4

<p>In Part 3 I ended with:

<p class=NoteBox>... we might conclude that representationalism in general, and photography in particular, are doomed to prosaic artlessness.

So let's look at an example:

http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/a/a8/To_prince_edward_island.jpg
To Prince Edward Island by <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alex_Colville">Alex Colville</a>

At first blush this picture seems photographic, but we soon see the artist has simplified or abstracted the scene by removing small details, while maintaining the precision of outlines we associate with reality. The relatively smooth areas with three-dimensional shading create a pleasingly sculptural quality (in stark contrast to the disquieting aspects of the subject matter). This may be prose, but if so it is the sinewy sort of prose we associate with Homer and Hemingway. 

The advantage of realism is that the artist gets to piggy-back on to the vast heritage of graphic associations that humanity has accumulated over the past 50,000 years. <i>To Prince Edward Island</i> starts with purely aesthetic qualities, such as sculptural massivity, but goes on to hint at unspoken significances freighted with mythic gravity. We can analyze the picture further to uncover the slight cant to the deck of the ship; the unsmiling stare of the woman with her binoculars pointed directly at us; the cataract opacity of the front elements of the binoculars that should instead quiver with our own reflections; the lifeboat looming over everything else. But the impact of these factors arises precisely to the degree that these are non-verbal, by-passing the comfortable world of the verbal cortex and striking straight at the fight-or-flight reflexes wired into the visual cortex.  They remind us that a blue sky and summer weather provide no real haven from danger. They take a cruise ship filled with vacationers and transform it into a merchant marine freighter vigilant against the wolf pack. Lyric poetry? Think Beowulf, not Browning.

But perhaps the abstraction of detail in Colville's painting is an essential ingredient in transforming the visually prosaic into art. If so, there would not seem to be much hope for photography. But let's see.

<a href="http://www.masters-of-photography.com/G/gowin/gowin_family_full.html">
Family, Emmet Gowin

Getting people to be themselves in front of a camera instead of stiffly posing is an art all to itself. This <i>could</i> be a father's snapshot of his family, and for all I know this is Emmet's own family or relatives. Yet at some time or other this picture hung framed and undoubtedly matted in white on a gallery wall. To a fellow artist the wedding of so many rich and graceful shapes, dynamically arranged into a single scene is sheer mastery. Could the watermelon halves have just happened to have been laid out upon the lawn? We'll likely never know. But this is not an image that lets us wallow in mere surface values. It speaks of material poverty just barely staved off by a new lawn chair, and of spiritual impoverishment - the long-term deprivation of some essential vitamin of the soul not present in the local soil - not at all staved off by family festivities on a warm summer's day.

Can we at least hold this picture up as evidence that poetry can be achieved without abstraction? Unfortunately, no. The single most obvious fact about it is that colour has been abstracted down to black, to white, and to shades of grey. 

So what's next? Stay tuned to this same channel for Part 5, a report on the business of art; the Frolic of the Egos in the world of art.


///
Photography is pretty much the current ultimate in representationalism, so let's concentrate on that. 


Composition/cropping
Colour & contrast
B&W abstraction

Creative use of the camera allows us to add

Time/motion effects
Extreme wide angle, telephoto
shallow DOF

Digital dark room allows us to add

Re-arranging, adding, removing elements
Complete re-colouring

Does this add up to poetry? Can the photographer or representational artist add value beyond slavishly copying nature?

Downside of non-representation is lack of context and connotations. Representation leverages a few million years of visual experience.

Art is a journey that takes a life time to complete. What seems appropriate at one stage will seem limiting at the next stage. My son used to watch Thomas the Tank Engine religiously, later it was The Simpsons.

Outline

http://theonlinephotographer.blogspot.com/2007_01_01_archive.html#117002143513800031

http://www.pickeringmarkets.com/

Growth never ceases
- look through a picture vs seeing the renddering
Tastes differ
Some beauty is innate
- shared neural mechanisms
- modified by cultural experience
- modified by individual experience
Beauty not everyone's main focus: using the world, power
- the artist uses the world too: exploitingg beauty and story
Emotional triggers differ
Why make art at all?
Art no longer rare/precious
 Representational art has advantage over non-rep of story-telling

Part 6
Toolbox II

Perspective
Distortion

Part 8 Photography:

Is photography art?

The first question you may have is whether photography can even be considered to be art. The underlying assumption we may have when asking this question is that art means hand-made, imaginative, and beautiful. But these assumptions are no longer made in the world of painting, so why should they be made in the world of photography?

Photographs can be roughly grouped into two categories: documentation and art. Documentary photographs include CSI evidence, photojournalism, eBay product shots, and your family snapshots. The basic idea is to accurately record a scene for the historical record. Art photographs get created when the photographer's main purpose is along the lines of decoration, beauty, or self-expression. There is a tremendous amount of overlap: Photojournalists get awards in part because their images are well-composed and dramatically lit. Commercial photographers often earn their bread and butter by prettifying their subject matter. Landscape art photographers often pride themselves on how little they alter their photographs.

Special tools:
-Time/motion effects
-Extreme wide angle, telephoto
-shallow DOF
-macro

Part 9 Putting it all together
Analysis of two pictures

Part 10? Frolic of Egos
1. Art used to be done by a very few people who had the means. Good art was rare like jewels and spices; and photography didn't exist either. Now between pop expl, education, and affluence there are thousands of excellent artists alive.

2. Collectors are not so much buying a piece of art as a piece of history. 

3. Art galleries sell name recognition. Name recognition has little to do with the intrinsic quality of a body of work and everything to do with the artist's competence at self-promotion. 